Lilly Kofler & Kyle Stufflebam 

Project Title: Loss Aversion and the Utility Maximization Heuristic: decision-Making between gambles with equal probabilities and unequal pay-offs 

1)What: 
This project focuses on reframing a real-world inspired high-low gamble. The gamble as it exists in natural contexts goes as follows: A whole number between $100 and $1000 is chosen at random. A person (in this case radio station callers) can make one guess, and if she guesses correctly, she will win the jackpot (that amount of money). For the purposes of this final project, we will be working with data collected from a laboratory version of the described above high-low game. In this study participants were asked to choose a number on a single die. The die was then rolled, and if the die landed on the number the participant guessed, she won that amount of money. 

2)Why:
Data collected from the real-world version of the gambling game shows that people tend to guess in direct conflict with predictions posited by expected utility theory. Expected utility theory assumes that people should approach this problem rationally and choose the options that will earn them the most money across all probability and pay-off variations. Based upon this model, people playing the real-world gambling game should be guessing at the higher end of the value spectrum (e.g., $900- $999) to earn the most money. However data shows that they tend to rely on less accurate, but potentially more acessible, decision-making heuristics that cause them to guess in direct conflict with predictions (e.g., $500 or below) (Urminsky & Yang, unpublished data). The question then follows: what can judgment and decision-making theorists borrow from psychology to reframe economic choice problems in such a way that people will default to expected value heuristics when faced with such decisions. Therefore, the goal of this project was to subtly reframe the dice rolling laboratory game in such a way that would cause participants to employ an expected value driven approach to this problem and maximize their gains across multiple gambles.  

3)How:
The experiment described above has/will be completed, and we will have a full dataset to manipulate, similar to the census undergraduate project for CFSS. We will import out database into a python object. We will define a function that will take the average of all die roll guesses per round of the game for each round that is played (a total of 10 rounds).  We will then take advantage of the pandas analysis functions to compare these averages across all four conditions of the experiment. For the qualitative data collected in the experiment, we will write a function designed to pull out specific words and report their counts to see the frequency with which people report using specific game-play strategies. Depending on user-selected parameters, we will construct descriptive tables/figures and display them along with comparative statistics.